ANCWL FREE-STATE STATEMENT ON THE COURT RULING OF BLOEMFONTEIN HIGH COURT 29 November 2017 The African National Congress Women's League (ANCWL) in Free-State (FS) Province has noted with disappointment the Court ruling of the Bloemfontein High Court. The ANCWL in FS Province has observed signs that the African National Congress (ANC) might have been infiltrated by the fanatics of lawfare who runs to courts whenever they get defeated through internal processes. The lawfare fanatics and their masters might argue that their acts are justified however their intention is not to build strong effective, efficient ANC but to collapse all ANC internal processes for the benefit of the anti-transformation masters. The call for Radical Economic Transformation (RET) which means the fundamental changes in the structure, systems, institutions and patterns of ownership, management and control of the financial sector in favour of all South Africans, the majority of whom are African and female, has made the anti-transformation forces within and outside the Republic of South Africa to regroup. These forces have appointed agents in and outside the organisation to fight tooth and nail to ensure that the status quo of economic marginalisation of the majority and exclusion of Africans on land ownership continues.  The ANCWL FS as an integral part of the ANC in the Province will engage the ANC FS leadership and make proposals on the way-forward in relation to the outcome of the Court. ANCWL FS pleads with all its supporters, members and the general membership of the ANC in the Province to remain calm and united. No amount of lawfare will change the decision of the ANCWL FS members and the general membership of the ANC in the Province to champion the call for RET. Post the 54th ANC National Conference, the  following cadres will be at the leadership helm of the ANC and work with the collective to advance RET.   1. President: Cde Dr Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma 2. Deputy President: Cde DD Mabuza 3. National Chairperson: Cde  Nathi Mthethwa 4. Secretary General: Cde Ace Magashule 5. Deputy Secretary General: Cde Jessie Duarte 6. Treasure General: Cde Maite Nkoana-Mashabane. The ANCWL FS leadership, members and supporters are  adamant that the fanatics of lawfare and their masters will not succeed in stopping RET. It is unstoppable revolution rooted in the masses of our people. It is a demand by the masses and no funder of Courts against ANC will silence the masses.  RET  now or never!! Statement issued by Thandi Masiteng, ANCWL Free-State Provincial Secretary, 29 November 2017