THE AGE OF NO CONSEQUENCES (AND LYING) The Life Esidimeni tragedy, in which 143 psychiatric patients lost their lives, often in painful circumstances, subject to inhumane conditions, is replaying before our very eyes. This, as part of the arbitration hearing proceedings are televised on news channels daily. While watching the painful interrogation of former Director of Mental Health in Gauteng, Makgabo Manamela, by former Constitutional Court judge Dikgang Moseneke, and hearing her often repeated remark “it was not my fault”, one cannot help but think that we have entered a political age of no consequences. In his testimony to a parliamentary inquiry on Eskom, the former Chairman of the Board, Zola Tsotsi, made statements under oath that seriously implicated the relevant Minster, Lynne Brown, as being part of the state capture process, resulting in losses or misspent funding of millions of Rands. Minister Brown’s now notorious remark in response to this, that “one of us is lying” falls into the same category of no consequences. And Bathabile Dlamini’s arrogant and cavalier attitude about the Post Office contract with SASSA brings the same to mind: she simply does not take responsibility for her mandated task to ensure that 17 million poor South Africans get their social grants in time. It is either “not my fault” or “not my responsibility” or “I did not do that”. There is seemingly no sense of consequence, not for actions nor for lack of action. Even amongst some of the whistle-blowers there is now an attitude of “I was always against state capture and corruption”, “I never knew or met any Gupta” or “I warned them against this or that”. It is clear that even some of these seemingly laudable actions may be a way of escaping responsibility of what was done or not done - now that it is clear that the tide is turning. It reminds us of the fact that it is not possible to find many white South Africans who ever supported apartheid. Theuns Eloff: Executive Director, FW de Klerk Foundation