Close relatives: collapse and successIn June 2017, nearly 4 billion years after life appeared on Earth, about 7 billion people find themselves fanned across virtually its entire surface. These teeming masses are all, for practical purposes, in constant actual or potential contact, kept that way by trade, modern transport technology and a ubiquitous communications industry. I call it global entanglement: overlapping, multi-dimensional encompassing the biosphere (including ourselves), the technosphere and the geosphere. We are not evolved to meet this challenge and the main way we learn is through the harsh lessons of history. Along the way our failures have been many and painful. Entanglement makes errors of judgement potentially more catastrophic while also helping the dissemination of cultural intelligence. But it's an arms race with very high stakes and the odds are not in humanity's favour. Collapse, preceded or accompanied by false narratives, worsening inequality, political failure, famine, violence, disease, refugees and, of course death, has occurred throughout history. The Black Death in the 14th century killed one-third of the entire population between India and Iceland in the words of one modern historian. Various famines listed by Wikipedia records 60 million dead in China between 1850 -1873 and a blog suggests 25-50 million USA deaths would occur within the first 3 months of a hypothetical 'economic collapse'. What of Africa? The African Bank estimated roughly 8 mil to 10 mil war-related deaths from 1990 - 2008 in 13 selected countries, a list which excluded Somalia, Ethiopia or Sudan to name the most obvious. Of the 60 million global refugees in 2014 a considerable proportion were generated in Africa destabilising other, already shaky, African countries with South Africa in the lead according to the Fragile State Index of 2016. The elites, white and black, shake their heads disapprovingly when the 'deplorables' at the bottom of our social ladder break out in murderous riots. Why should they be surprised? Bare figures, of course, fail dismally in capturing the full immiseration of the ordinary people manifest in premature mortality, hunger, physical, social and cultural stunting, environmental degradation, violence and hopelessness. In low trust/poor governance environments ruthless elites fight to extract their last pound of flesh openly or within the token constraints of enfeebled democratic norms. &nbsp; And what of South Africa? Less than 3 decades ago, the darling of a confident Western world. Hailed by the vast majority of the world's nations for throwing off the yoke of racial oppression, Nelson Mandela, was courted by the high and mighty. Almost everyone felt on the right side of history, including myself. The various stories of South Africa's erratic path down the slippery slopes of possibility are known to most readers of Politicsweb. Not all are accurate or helpful but our present predicament has been usefully summed up by Ricardo Hausmann, Director of the Center for International Development in Harvard University&rsquo;s Kennedy School of Government, as a tale of missed opportunity and wrong choices. Although not the first to spell it out, his experience and expertise makes his analysis is compelling. In essence, for short-term political gain and for mistaken ideological reasons, the current economic and related inequalities in South African society has been cast in racial terms, as in 'white monopoly capital' the answer to which is, purportedly, 'radical economic transformation. According to Prof Hausmann, this formulation is factually false. But more importantly, it will contribute to on-going economic decline through the flight of skilled and specialised know-how from South Africa along with failure to create the firms and environment necessary for real economic, social and material, transformation. The upshot is, in the absence of an effective economic underpinning, we are heading for some form of collapse. The Fragile States Index gives further weight to this scenario. Within a spectrum of scores from 18.8 (Finland, very sustainable) to Somalia at 114 (very high alert), South Africa comes in at the last position in the 'warning' category at 69.9, on the border of 'elevated warning'. But more significantly the trend over the last decade is listed as 'significant worsening', just short of 'critical worsening'. In short, the Zupta decade bringing us to the edge. Collapse can take a variety of forms which generally have in common a significant decline in financial viability, increased physical insecurity and failure of important operational and physical infrastructure with shortages of food and other essential services. Such developments may be preceded or accompanied by violence from mobs or the state or both and political fragmentation or imposition of authoritarian rule. Longer term outcomes are also variable but in Africa most commonly we have seen variations on the theme of progressively decreased legitimacy, capture of the state by one or more predatory elites and cycles of violence with periodic mass generation of refugees, loss of essential skills and the flourishing of corruption and dependency. The afflicted country and entire region becomes set within a lowered trajectory of possibility and expectation, acutely vulnerable to internal and external challenges. Dependency on outside aid becomes entrenched and the prospects for serious improvement from within fade to zero. To find an exit to the cycle of collapse we need to extract the essential drivers of the self-sustaining spiral in which we are currently trapped. Our national balance sheet in 1994 (to select a somewhat arbitrary date) came with positives and negatives. The positives were massive: large size, relatively benign climate, considerable bio-ecological diversity, abundant mineral resources and energy, the best infrastructure in Africa, a small but strong foundation of technological and scientific expertise, functioning proto-democratic institutions and a Constitution reflecting a remarkable alloy of idealism and pragmatism. We were also buoyed by massive international goodwill and support. At least a good part of that inheritance is still with us but the debit side of the balance sheet was equally daunting. Some hindrances were glaring, including immense material inequalities, the huge gaps in education and embedded economic features which still favoured whites. Less tangible but still pretty clear was the simmering sense of anger and injustice on one side matched by fear and sullen resentment on the other. This was by no means universal and many, both black and white, approached the future with hope. Perhaps less fully appreciated were the huge differences in culture and historical memory, the psychological residues of centuries of division, domination and oppression on the psyches of all South Africans and the massive ideological differences within and between the various camps. Without proper 'redress' - still undefined and somewhat open-ended - these demons remained, hungrier than ever. Our liberal, social reconstructivist constitution was, under the circumstances, a minor miracle but clearly did not achieve universal buy-in. South African politics dithered in the new political freedom while material inequalities worsened, the social fabric frayed further, corruption became embedded in our governmental structures, and the sense of betrayal and hopelessness felt, paradoxically, by both the poor and the privileged grew. Our nearest neighbour, Zimbabwe, crashed with our tacit complicity. We became the epicentre of the global AIDS epidemic which Mbeki also lost no time in exacerbating by substituting ideological fantasies for scientific reality. South Africa became a voracious consumer of the international memes and narratives centred around grievance, injustice and identity which are threatening even stable democracies. In short we were caught in a spiral of history, ours and others. But history has its unexpected twists and into the whirlpool stepped a determined, brilliant and combatative politician named Helen Zille. She took the DA, more-or-less by the scuff of the neck, and converted it from a liberal, white-dominated organisation into a potent vehicle for transformation and renewal. She invaded the ANC's turf in the townships, spoke the local languages, danced the local dances and physically and metaphorically hugged the local disempowered citizens. She introduced rigorous procedures within the party to ensure financial integrity, institutional accountability and job performance and strategised obsessively on projects to improve the tangible material existence of the poor. She actively recruited and cultivated black and coloured leaders and promoted the commercial potential of the Cape. In so doing, first Cape Town and then the Western Cape became the poster child for what a future united, non-racial South Africa could look like. Zille and her party were rewarded by the people of the Western Cape by winning every election with increased majorities. They were 'rewarded' by the rest of South Africa by making the Western Cape the holy grail for internal migrants. And Zille personally was honoured by the international community by being elected Mayor of the Year for 2014. But history also has its ironies and one of these is that every 'good idea' seems to come with the seeds of its own destruction. In Zille's case, she successfully transformed both the leadership and membership of the DA into something resembling the South African demographic profile. But given the new complexion of the party, both metaphorical and literal, the singular vision and drive created by her leadership became diluted. The rainbow's end was the return of political 'normality' which is simply not good enough in the SA context. So what is realistic, other than a descent into some form of political and economic collapse presaged by the Zupta thrust for hegemony - a thrust which has been blunted but not fully defeated? The only sane alternative is to continue with 'normal' politics but to alter the trajectory steadily towards eliminating our destabilising inequalities and towards protecting the Constitutional framework within which progress remains possible. For this to have any chance of success we need at least one effective political party to grasp the essential elements of such a program and to implement it as a coherent and consistent strategy. Until recently, the DA seemed the only viable vehicle for such a role, no longer is that assured. It is no use being the marginal frontrunner of a pack of political parties equally bereft of productive ideas and beset by corruption, expedient racism and factionalism. To be credible the DA must offer a transformative politics within the South African context. This entails a steadfast refusal, however tempting, to join the great South African racial theatre in which history serves as a prop to public displays of outrage, victimhood and moral superiority. It cannot afford to feed the addictions of the South African public (and media) irrespective of colour or political persuasion. The DA will have to address its appeal to the sane majority present in all classes and colours which cannot be achieved through rhetoric easily outflanked or appropriated by any number of experienced operatives. The courts too are a double-edged though vital weapon which need to be used with clear strategic objectives These obviously include defence of our constitutional institutions and freedoms, but excessive use will diminish effectiveness and be regarded by the public as 'politics through the judiciary'. Even worse the judiciary and our regulatory institutions will lose whatever public legitimacy they still retain. The DA in particular will need to level with the citizens of South Africa and find the communication skills to present the inevitable postponements of gratification and sacrifices our realistic choices available entail. Economic growth is vital and the politics of redress and transformation will only succeed in the context of economic sustainability. 'State decay' may be easy to fix according to a recent Politicsweb headline (in theory at least) but real progress will be dauntingly hard in the South African context. There is an immense gap between general principles and operational implementation in the South African social, political and economic environment. Almost nothing beats hard information. Avoid reducing national politics to issues of personality and populist demagoguery. Point out by all means political manipulation, its methods and its beneficiaries but substitute facts for adjectives. Show the consequences of bad ideas which abound in our region. Part of the mission of the DA is to educate our public in political and economic realities. We need a mature electorate more than the predictable banalities of party politics if we are succeed as a nation. I said almost nothing beats hard information, but one thing does: changed realities on the ground. The transformative politics of the Western Cape over the past decade was achieved largely by living out, even if imperfectly, the party rhetoric in actual daily practice, and thereby changing existential and visible material realities for the Western Cape communities. It is this which kept the party in power, not its ideology or even Zille's communication skills. The sheer scale of the South African inequalities, urban demographic pressures and cultural-historical-ethnic differences are exceptional, even within a global context, and democracy is not an efficient political mechanism for such a multi-dimensional complex undertaking. But the alternatives in our context are worse. A final thought. A better South Africa cannot be built through the political realm alone. Everyone has a contribution to make and the future will be as much a test of the calibre of our citizens as our swirling political currents. Thus the politics of progress is for the long haul and for the realistically courageous. The verdict is still open but barely. Mike Berger