PRESIDENT ZUMA SIGNS SIU PROCLAMATION ON THE SOUTH AFRICAN BROADCASTING CORPORATION 25 August 2017 President Jacob Zuma has authorised the Special Investigating Unit (SIU) to investigate certain matters in respect of procurement at the South African Broadcasting Corporation (SABC), in terms of section 2 (2) of the Special Investigating Unit and Special Tribunals Act, 1996. The Proclamation authorises the SIU to investigate the following allegations: - The procurement of, or contracting for goods, works or services by or on behalf of the SABC from various companies or  service providers and payment made in respect thereof in a manner that was not fair, transparent, competitive and equitable or cost effective. - Any undisclosed or unauthorised interest that certain members of the personnel of the SABC may have had with regard to contractors, suppliers or service providers who submitted bids for work or did business with the SABC; or contractors awarded by or on behalf of the SABC. The Proclamation further authorises the SIU to investigate allegations of: (a) Serious maladministration in connection with the affairs of the SABC. (b) Improper or unlawful conduct by board members, officials or employees of the SABC. (c) Unlawful appropriation or expenditure of public money or property. (d) Unlawful, irregular or unapproved acquisitive act, transaction, measure or practice having a bearing upon State property. (e) Intentional or negligent loss of public money or damage to public property. (f) Unlawful or improper conduct by any person, which has caused or may cause serious harm to the interests of the public or any category thereof. *** PRESIDENT ZUMA SIGNS SIU PROCLAMATION ON THE  KWAZULU-NATAL PROVINCIAL TREASURY President Jacob Zuma has authorised the Special Investigating Unit (SIU) to investigate certain matters in respect of the affairs of the KwaZulu-Natal Provincial Treasury, in terms of section 2 (2) of the Special Investigating Unit and Special Tribunals Act, 1996. The Proclamation authorises the SIU to investigate the following allegations: - The appointment of service providers to render consultancy services to the Internal Audit and Infrastructure and Economic Development Unit of the provincial Treasury in a manner that was  not fair competitive, transparent equitable or cost-effective. - Any unauthorised, irregular or fruitless and wasteful expenditure incurred by the provincial Treasury or the State in respect of the appointment of the service providers. - Fraud, corruption, irregularities, malpractices or maladministration regarding the affairs of the Treasury in relation to the appointment of service providers or the administration of the Municipal Finance Support Programme. The Proclamation further authorises the SIU to investigate allegations of; (a) Serious maladministration in connection with the affairs of the Treasury, (b) Improper or unlawful conduct by officials or employees of the Treasury, (c) Unlawful appropriation or expenditure of public money or property, (d) Unlawful, irregular or unapproved acquisitive act, transaction, measure or practice having a bearing upon State property, (e) Intentional or negligent loss of public money or damage to public property, (f) Unlawful or improper conduct by any person, which has caused or many cause serious harm to the interests of the public or any category thereof. Statements issued by Dr Bongani Ngqulunga, The Presidency, 25 August 2017