#KZNOncologyCrisis: DA visits Addington Hospital following MEC Dhlomo’s attempts to downplay provincial crisis 7 September 2017 Yesterday, during a mee ting of the National Health portfolio committee, KZN Health MEC Sibongiseni Dhlomo tried to sugar-coat the current oncology crisis in KZN. He was aided by Health Minister Aaron Motsoaledi who attempted to downplay the seriousness of the situation in KZN by talking about the shocking state of oncology services in other provinces. The Minister blamed major human resource problems and procurement issues for the crisis currently faced in KZN.  The Minister also admitted to knowing about the impending crisis since 2014. However, the Minister’s comments are no excuse for what cancer patients in KZN have suffered and continue to suffer. Given yesterday's attempt by the MEC to downplay the reality in KZN and the lack of accountability, the DA will be joining the delegation of the National Council of Provinces on their visit to Addington Hospital this morning where, despite all of the talk by Minister Motsoaledi and MEC Dhlomo, very little has happened in the three months since the release of the SAHRC report on the province’s Oncology Crisis. The purpose of yesterday’s meeting was primarily to allow Minister Motsoaledi and MEC Dhlomo to brief members on the SAHRC's report into the KZN’s ongoing oncology crisis. The DA had hoped to hear a proper plan. Instead we heard more of a plan about a plan as well as the shocking revelation that only one oncology machine at Addington hospital will be fixed. The other, it appears, is damaged beyond repair. Yesterday, the Minister also told the DA what we already know - that KZN’s Department of Health is collapsing. His presentation was an admission of this, as well as an admission of his own lack of oversight and lack of holding MEC Dhlomo to account.  The MEC also dodged the questions asked, giving the same tired responses he has provided for years, again indicating his inability to respond to the crisis. After what transpired during yesterday’s meeting, the DA expects heads to roll - the first being MEC Dhlomo’s.  As the political leader of this department he has failed cancer patients in their hour of need. The DA is committed to holding both the national and provincial health departments accountable and to ensure that they offer constructive solutions for this crisis. Issued by Imran Keeka, DA KZN Spokesperson on Health, 7 September 2017