DA condemns horrific violence against KZN learners 12 September 2017 The DA is deeply disturbed by the emergence of two cell phone videos - one showing the alleged gang rape of a school girl by a KwaZulu-Natal school principal and two teachers and another which shows a male teacher viciously assaulting two young female learners. Both incidents are believed to have taken place in the Esikhawini area near Richards Bay. The horrific nature of both incidents makes them difficult to even view and the DA condemns both acts in the strongest possible terms. We expect swift and stern action to be taken both criminally by the SAPS and internally by the Department of Education in this province. We also expect the harshest consequences. Certainly, they must never be allowed to teach young people again. The almost weekly appearance of criminal and violent acts at schools in our province is deeply concerning and points to an overall breakdown in the moral fibre of our society. While KZN Education MEC, Mthandeni Dlungwane has referred to corporal punishment as ‘illegal’, his words ring hollow for the learners who have been on the receiving end of such barbaric acts.  Not to mention the hundreds of young people who have witnessed such acts The DA has consistently called for KZN’s Department of Education to present a proper strategy on how it plans to stop this scourge our schools. This issue demands appropriate discipline measures which must not include either physical violence or corporal punishment. It also requires proper training in school discipline and consequences for those who ignore this move. Investigations must also look into the action or lack thereof by school principals. Physical violence in schools does not occur without their knowledge and stern measures must be taken against those who attempt to hide corporal punishment and any form of violence against our learners. The DA has also called for a holistic approach to this problem which we believe must incorporate the KZN Department of Social Development.  A proactive rather than a reactive approach is key if this strategy is to have any chance of success. It is critical that the ANC-led government in KZN now moves beyond mere words – our learners need action. The DA demands this in the interests of their safety. These are young people who come to school to learn and better themselves, not to be brutalised by the very same people who are supposed to be their role models. Issued by Rishigen Viranna, DA KZN Spokesperson on Education, 12 September 2017