BREAKING: Jupiter Joburg closes, Black Powder takes over baton by Herman Manson. Iconic South African ad agency, The Jupiter Drawing Room (Johannesburg) has been closed down but the baton has been transferred to black-owned startup, Black Powder, founded by Gugu Madlala and Sizwe Kumalo. Young, Gifted & Killing It: Zwelethu Radebeby Veli Ngubane. Zweli Radebe's been directing TVCs for local and international agencies and clients in nine countries across Africa and Europe. Graham Lang joins Toronto-based shop Juniper Park\TBWAby Jarred Cinman. Before talking about what the MAC Charter says and approaches to meeting this, let's talk about why it's important to do so. Tanzanian agency Aggrey & Clifford gets East Africaby Herman Manson. This independent Tanzanian agency offers a range of communications and advertising solutions to clients. By Invitation Only: An introduction to BEE in the advertising industryby Jarred Cinman. Before talking about what the MAC Charter says and approaches to meeting this, let's talk about why it's important to do so. Masterclass Notes: Trends from agencyScope SA 2017 fieldwork by Johanna McDowell. Here are some early observations from the Scopen agencyScope 2017 fieldwork in South Africa. Regular Reads: - [CARTOON] The Marketing Mice on Trevor Noah's triumph  - Ad of the Week: Burger King gets fancy with le burger- Cover Stories: Thoughtfulness in design 22 Sep 2017 — formerly MagLove- Shelf Life: Zeitz MOCAA's brand ID by M&C Saatchi Abel- SA TV Ratings: DStv — primetime top 30 for Aug 2017 On the Radar: - AdFocus Awards 2017 finalists- All the Pendoring 2017 finalists revealed!- Windhoek Beer appoints digital agency- Internet driving growth for Africa's entertainment & media companies- South Africa’s top performing brands on social media- Facebook used by 29% of South Africans Go to MarkLives.com for breaking news, exclusive industry opinion, company news and jobs! Sign up here for the MarkLives email newsletter every Monday and Thursday. Follow MarkLives on Twitter, Facebook, Google+, LinkedIn, Pinterest and YouTube. NEW: Ramify.biz — connecting marketers and agencies free of charge in South Africa, Namibia, Mauritius, Zimbabwe, Botswana — and now Kenya, Nigeria, Tanzania and Uganda!