Successful first phase of Parliamentary inquiry into Eskom 6 December 2017 The ANC Study Group on Public Enterprises congratulates the Portfolio Committee on Public Enterprises on having a successful first phase of the parliamentary inquiry into governance at Eskom. As the committee concluded their last hearing for 2017 today, we thank Members of the committee for having displayed maximum unity across political party lines. We also thank the 16 witnesses who have come before the inquiry thus far to shed light on matters pertaining to our power utility. We are however disappointed at elements of non-cooperation through delay tactics employed by some individuals invited to appear before the inquiry. The first phase of the inquiry was also marred by disruptive tendencies in various forms with the aim of stopping and delaying the work of this parliamentary inquiry. The ANC condemns the continuous acts of intimidation against members and staff who are party to this inquiry. We view acts of intimidation and other such antics as a manifestation for the need for this inquiry to be thoroughly conducted and urgently concluded to unearth any possible wrong doing at Eskom. We assure the people of South Africa that acts of intimidation will not deter us, if anything, it motivates us to proceed with the work of parliament, which is to conduct oversight over State Owned Enterprises. As phase two of the inquiry will commence in the first term of 2018, we assure individuals mentioned thus far that they will be afforded an opportunity to testify before the committee. This is done in the name of fairness and transparency as the guiding principles directing the work of this parliamentary inquiry.  We encourage members of the public to give this inquiry the necessary support by coming forth with any information they might have which could assist this inquiry. We thank Members and staff for their hard work and dedication to date and wish them a restful break over the holiday season. Issued by Nonceba Mhlauli, Spokesperson, Parliament, 6 December 2017