Judgment handed down in minstrels case This morning judgment was handed down in the Western Cape High Court in favour of the City of the Cape Town in respect of the matter brought against the City by the Cape Town Minstrel Carnival Association (CTMCA). Read more below: The case brought against the City by the CTMCA was dismissed with costs. We are pleased with the judgment and feel vindicated. We were adamant from the very beginning that the allegations against the City were baseless. An event permit was not issued to the CTMCA due to non-compliance with the applicable event by-laws and legislation. Today’s judgment is a clear indication, once again, that our administrative processes are fair, just and sound. This was the fourth case in two yearsand the fifth judgment handed down in favour of the City. All requests for funding were received through the City of Cape Town’s event support application system and were considered by the Special Events Committee within their delegations or recommendations for support to Council. The City took into account the Constitution, the Municipal Finance Management Act, the Prevention of Organised Crime Act, the City’s Credit Control and Debt Collection Policy, and other considerations when they reviewed the applications. However, that being said, I think it’s time for the CTMCA to stop politicising the matter. It is not about them as an association but the troupes who they represent. As we have stated many times, the event is not about a particular organisation. It is a long-standing tradition in the lives of whole communities that come out in large numbers to support their loved ones who participate. I ask the various associations not to deprive their loved ones and communities of this opportunity that is a highlight of the year. All other associations have participated over the years when the event was organised by the CTMCA. Last year the event was organised by the Kaapse Klopse Karnival Association (KKKA) and it went well. We expect the same this year. The CTMCA needs to work with the KKKA to put on a spectacular show like none other. We are working with the event organisers to make sure that this is the best minstrels event yet, which is the most powerful way we can support and honour this cultural tradition. Statement issued by Cape Town Mayoral Committee Member for Safety and Security, and Social Services, JP Smith, 19 December 2017