 ANC’s expropriation of land without compensation is dangerous The decision, taken at the ANC conference, that South Africa’s Constitution must be amended to allow for the expropriation of land without compensation is dangerous and poses a threat to the agricultural sector, private landownership and the economy. The decision essentially jeopardises all private landownership and it paves the way for the nationalisation of land in South Africa in the future,” says Dr Pieter Groenewald, leader of the FF Plus. “Those that believe that the conditions of the resolution, namely that food security and the economy may not be harmed, will in effect make the expropriation of land without compensation impossible, are being misled. Cyril Ramaphosa has mastered the art of emphasising only those aspects that put people at ease and the interpretation of the said conditions will be an ANC-interpretation. “Once the Constitution has been amended, the provision regarding food security will be interpreted such that it will allow for the expropriation of agricultural land without compensation. “In his final speech at the ANC conference, Ramaphosa commended the ANC for promoting and building the economy since 1994. That, however, is an example of a flawed ANC-interpretation as the reality is that the economy has declined and now has a growth rate of only 0,6 %. “Ramaphosa has no choice but to do the ANC’s bidding and as an individual, his power is limited. When the Constitution is amended, it will be all over for private landownership in the long term. “In order to amend South Africa’s Constitution, the ANC needs a two-thirds majority that it doesn’t have, however, the EFF has already indicated that it will support such an amendment. With the support of the EFF, the ANC will meet the requirement of a two-thirds majority. “The FF Plus will do everything in its power to oppose the amendment to the Constitution,” says Dr Groenewald. Statement issued by Dr. Pieter Groenewald, FF Plus leader, 21 December 2017