SAHRC to Intervene in Racial Tensions at Unisa College of Law Tuesday 12 December 2017 The South African Human Rights Commission (the Commission or SAHRC) is aware of allegations of racial tension amongst academic staff at the University of South Africa’s (Unisa), College of law. The Commission continues to remain concerned by allegations of racism which undermines the collective effort to build a culture of human rights in a society based on human dignity, the achievement of equality, the advancement freedoms, non-racialism, non-sexism, supremacy of the constitution, the rule of law, accountability, responsiveness and openness; as set out in section 1 of the Constitution.  The Commission thus confirms that it has received a request to intervene and deal with the allegations emanating from Unisa, which has since been publicised on Sunday, the 10th December 2017.  The Commission finds it particularly concerning that two decades into our constitutional democratic dispensation, we, as a nation, are still grappling with challenges of racism and racial tension, even within our institutions of higher learning, institutions that have the responsibility and role as thought leaders to transform society for the betterment of all.  The Commission regards the roles that institutions of higher learning play, as being integral and the Commission has actively played its role in ensuring that these institutions play their role as fertile foundations for developing a human rights culture. A year ago, on the 9th December 2016, the SAHRC released its report entitled “Transformation at Public Universities in South Africa” (the report). The report emanated from a series of public hearings looking at the nature of transformation at South Africa’s institutions of higher learning.  At the time of the conclusion of the Commission’s hearings, a number of key developments transpired since, including the “Rhodes Must Fall”, “Fees Must Fall”, “Afrikaans Must Fall” and the “Outsourcing Must Fall” protests, and the setting up of the Fees Commission of Inquiry. The findings of the Commission as well as these events, subsequent to the Commission’s report, highlight a serious need for addressing transformation at institutions of higher learning. As a member of the Forum of Institutions Supporting Democracy in South Africa (FISD), the Commission recently participated in a workshop that highlighted the need for a collective approach to resolving transformational concerns at institutions of higher learning.   The Commission is of the view that transformation is a central issue of concern at Unisa and any other institution of higher learning, yet remains aware that this dialogue and debate needs to be held in an honest, robust manner that upholds a respect for human rights.  Statement issued by Gail Smith, SAHRC Spokesperson, 12 December 2017 