DA denied entry to conduct crucial matric exam standardisation oversight Despite repeated requests and the Constitutional responsibility of Members of Parliament to be allowed to conduct oversight, the DA was today denied entry to the standardisation meeting by Council for Quality Assurance in General and Further Education and Training body, Umalusi. In the past, members of the Portfolio Committee on Basic Education were invited and the about-turn begs the question as to why this is no longer the case. We did not wish to attend to question Umalusi’s credibility, we only want to understand the standardisation process. It is frankly unacceptable that we were blocked from attending especially considering Umalusi supposed commitment to transparency. Standardisation is the process by which the results of subjects are moderated and adjusted through a mathematical model to ensure consistency in examination levels and the best possible results for learners given any errors there might be in question papers. We will now write to Umalusi to obtain a full and detailed explanation to the following questions: - How many subjects have had their average marks adjusted upwards or downwards and by how much? - What are the subjects that have been adjusted, by how much and by what mode (raw, computer adjusted and what is the DBE influence in these decisions)? - Why is there a continuous need to adjust marks upward, as this points to a problem somewhere in the schooling system? - What is being done to identify and address this problem? - What is the impact of progressed learners overall on the adjustment of marks, and also specifically of those using the new Multiple Exam Opportunity? There have been serious concerns for a number years about the tendency to adjust many subjects upward by large amounts. For example, the Matric 2016 results, 32 of the 58 subjects had their marks adjusted (compared to 29 in 2015). Of the 32 adjusted subjects, 28 had their marks adjusted upwards and only four downwards. Mathematics and Maths Literacy had significant upward adjustments – a worrying indicator in combination with South Africa’s poor performance in the Trends in International Maths and Science Study (TIMSS) where we ranked second last in Grade 8 Maths. It is high time that Umalusi stops paying lip service to their commitment to openness and transparency and answer the questions put to them so that matriculants and their parents can have faith in the credibility of their results and qualifications. Statement issued Nomsa Marchesi MP, DA Shadow Deputy Minister of Basic Education, 22 December 2017