 NUM congratulates comrade Cyril Ramaphosa for being elected ANC President The National Union of Mineworkers congratulates its founding General Secretary comrade Cyril Ramaphosa for being elected the President of the African National Conference (ANC) during its 54th national conference currently underway at Nasrec in Johannesburg.  Comrade Cyril Ramaphosa led the NUM with commitment and dedication for a number of years. It is through the gallant fight by comrade Cyril Ramaphosa and others that miners who had for many years of service were given only a helmet and a pair of boots on their retirement and are today able to receive retirements benefits. The NUM regards itself as a leadership grooming institution hence it has always been willing to avail its leaders to assume important roles within the alliance structures e.g. Cyril Ramaphosa who became ANC Secretary General 1991 and is the newly elected ANC President and Deputy President of South Africa, Kgalema Motlanthe became ANC Secretary General 1997-2007 and the newly elected Chairperson of the ANC Gwede Mantashe, to mention but a few. NUM founding General Secretary Cyril Ramaphosa has this to say on why NUM was formed: "We formed the NUM so that it can be the shield and spear for mineworkers. That is what the NUM was formed for. So that with the spear it can launch attacks, it can march forward and eliminate all forms of exploitation and discrimination that was levelled against mineworkers. It became a shield because it was only the NUM that could defend mineworkers and it continues to be the only union in the mining industry that can defend mineworkers. The NUM became an important weapon against tribalism. Before the NUM was formed, tribalism was promoted, it was encouraged and it was planted throughout the mining industry. The mining bosses thrived on dividing workers and they divided workers along tribal lines."  "We wish comrade Cyril Ramaphosa and the collective all the very best during their term of office. We expect the newly elected President to be bold and brave to lead South Africa out of the current crisis of corruption and state capture into a prosperous future," said David Sipunzi, NUM General Secretary.  Statement issued by David Sipunzi: NUM General Secretary, 19 December 2017