New acting CEO for Media Development and Diversity Agency Cape Town – At the end of a year that saw the Media Development and Diversity Agency under scrutiny for its management, the agency announced that it appointed an acting CEO. William Baloyi has been appointed acting CEO, the agency announced on Wednesday, shortly after it was one of the topics of discussion at the ANC conference at Nasrec, Johannesburg. "Mr Baloyi is a communications professional with vast experience in media relations on all levels of government, as well as internationally," read the MDDA's statement. "He has served as Director of Media Relations in the Presidency and was the first head of communications and spokesperson in the newly-established City of Tshwane. He gained experience in the economic development environment as head of media relations of the Gauteng Economic Development Agency (GEDA), and in his capacity as head of communications for the Arms Procurement Commission, he dealt extensively with international media on judiciary processes." The agency says the recruitment of a permanent CEO is under way. The position of CEO was one of the bones of contention at the agency the past year. Board chairperson Phelisa Nkomo, who has taken leave until the end of her term in February, has received much criticism for usurping the powers of the CEO while the position was empty. It was also then acting CEO Donald Liphoko who opened up a can of worms at a meeting of the Portfolio Committee on Communication in August, where he made several allegations of mismanagement. A litany of accusations against Nkomo emerged over the past few months and, in October the committee decided to investigate the agency. At the meeting in October, then Communications Minister Ayanda Dlodlo confirmed that Nkomo acted as the agency's CEO and that he "was read the riot act". Nkomo previously denied to the committee that she had acted as CEO. In September, Deputy Minister of Communications Tandi Mahambehlala told the committee the MDDA board had tried to remove Liphoko because he put a stop to dubious contracts. The committee will look at the agency first thing in the new year, with DA MP Veronica van Dyk adamant that Nkomo should not be let off the hook. Reporting back on the ANC's subcommittee on communications and the battle of ideas, ANC NEC member and chief whip Jackson Mthembu said on Wednesday that said concerns were raised about the MDDA's capacity to assist community media. He said delegates said the legislation must be looked at critically. He said the MDDA had "all sorts of problems, including management". "Conference instructed us to remove all obstacles." News24