It's official: Post Office, banks to deliver grants in hybrid model Cape Town - The South African Post Office will handle core functions of a new social grants system, while commercial banks will play an increased, dicrect role for more than 2 million beneficiaries. The inter-ministerial committee on social security, headed by Minister Jeff Radebe, announced on Sunday that a "landmark" deal had been signed with SAPO to handle core functions of a new system. The deal was signed on Friday, December 8, and emphasises the hybrid nature of the new model, but with the Post Office providing the following: - central holding account for electronic services - on-boarding of new beneficiaries - biometric authentication - develop IT system It will also provide cash pay points at its outlets. Hybrid model The Post Office does not have exclusive rights over the system, however. Radebe announced that there will be an increased role for commercial banks and retailers, to give beneficiaries more choice. For the more than 2 million people who receive their grants electronically, the money will be deposited directly into their commercial bank accounts from January 1, 2018. Beneficiary account details have been verified and reconciled by Sassa. A special, low cost bank account is also being developed for those who want to move over to the banking sector, rather than rely on the Post Office or cash payments. The current Sassa card, provided by Grindrod Bank, has been extended by one year, and will not expire in December 2017. Cash payments delivered in rural areas for 2.9 million people (29%) will continue to use the current cash payment method. Incumbent service provider Cash Paymaster Services will not have direct control over this process come April 1, 2018. Sassa will go out on tender to find a new service provider to handle the cash payments portion of the grant system. A communication plan has also been developed which will utilise broadcast, social media, government channels and media networks to communicate the message to the public. More to follow. News24 Post Office-Sassa deal will cost the same as CPS - CEO Cape Town - South African Post Office CEO Mark Barnes says government's new hybrid model for the social grants scheme will cost the same as the current deal with Cash Paymaster Services. The inter-ministerial committee on social security, headed by Minister Jeff Radebe, announced on Sunday that a "landmark" deal had been signed with SAPO to handle core functions of a new system. There would also be an increased role for commercial banks and retailers, to give beneficiaries more choice. "The cost to government is pretty much the same as it was before and is within the approved National Treasury budget for this service," Barnes said at the press conference. "The way it is worked out is to take the total cost over the 5 years and divide that per year, so you have a flat rate for the period." News24 has seen the signed deal with the Post Office, which will cost roughly R2.2bn per year, an equivalent amount to the CPS deal. Barnes said the costs might also reduce in time, as the "expensive" cash payment portion of the grants system moves hands. The Post Office will pay for its own capitalisation, which will be recouped over the five years. Cash Paymaster Services The IMC was led by Radebe's department of planning and monitoring and evaluation (DPME). One aspect of the grants scheme that will not be fully transferable before the April 1, 2018 deadline will be cash payments at pay points. Around 2.9 million people still collect their grants via cash, which equates to 29% of the scheme. DPME director general Mpumi Mpofu stressed that CPS will have no part to play in the cash payment portion of the scheme under current terms beyond the deadline. Sassa will utilise the infrastructure set up by the current system to continue paying cash payments for six months after the April deadline, while it goes out on tender to find a new service provider. Sassa's 10 000 outlets will also be taken over by the Post Office, and be used in conjunction with SAPO's existing 2000 outlets. A mapping exercise will take place to minimise duplication of outlets in given areas. Beneficiary data In summary, there will be four key channels through which grants will be paid under the hybrid model: - direct payments into commercial bank accounts for 2 million beneficiaries; - payments into new or existing Post Office bank accounts; - payments through merchants in large, retail shops; and - payments at second tier vendors, such as (legally-recognised) Spaza shops, general dealers, village banks and small retailers. The 5 million beneficiaries who use Grindrod Bank accounts under the current system will be given the option of transferring to their commercial accounts or a Post Office account. Questions still remain around the securing of beneficiary data. The migration of the data from CPS to Sassa is still ongoing, and there is no indication yet if CPS has been ordered to destroy its database upon completion. The issue of legal deductions, which sparked the court challenge against the CPS deal by NGO Black Sash, is currently before the High Court in Pretoria. Sassa indicated in May it intended to appeal the court's ruling that deductions were still commercially legal. News24