Authorities’ careless attitude towards vandalism of Metrorail infrastructure sabotages Western Cape economy 13 December 2017 The unbridled vandalism of the Metrorail infrastructure in the Western Cape is sabotaging the region’s economy and it is unacceptable that the national and provincial governments seem to take note of it, but does nothing about it while the situation gets worse by the day, says Dr Corné Mulder, leader of the FF Plus in the Western Cape. According to Dr Mulder, it is shocking that the trains of the Cape Metro have basically come to a standstill because the service was simply left to deteriorate over the last few years. This is a frustration for tens of thousands of commuters that have no other way to get to work. He adds that it is equally shocking that the Metrorail had to publicly call on “law enforcement and agencies” to help combat problems such as vandalism, cable theft and the destruction of infrastructure. “It clearly implies that the national government and police as well as provincial law enforcement have, over the last few years, allowed the situation to get to this point where the train services around Cape Town have come to a standstill for perhaps the first time ever. “It is true that the national government is responsible for protecting the interests of the Metrorail, but the DA is just as guilty because they simply stood by and watched as the service slowly came to a grinding halt. “The Western Cape government must intervene because the situation is sabotaging the region and the province. It is no longer sufficient to look to the ANC government with the hope that they will do something about it. By now, we know that nothing will come of it. “The FF Plus is calling on the national and provincial governments to treat this as an emergency situation and to take action accordingly. A special unit, like the former railway police, will have to be established to restore order,” says Dr Mulder. Issued by Corné Mulder FF Plus provincial leader: Western Cape, 13 December 2017 