Mandla Mandela 'dismayed' by Public Protector's findings in funeral fiasco 14 December 2017 Cape Town – Mandla Mandela on Wednesday expressed his "utter indignation and dismay" at corruption allegations surrounding the arrangements of the funeral of his grandfather, former president Nelson Mandela. After a briefing at a special council meeting of the King Sabata Dalindyebo Local Municipality on the report of the Public Protector, Mandela said he found it incredulous that while the nation mourned, some were allegedly "conniving to profit financially by shamelessly siphoning off funds or alternatively allegedly not observing good governance in terms of following due protocol, observing delegations or mandates". He said in a statement that the allegations must be tested in court to ensure justice and that should they be found to be true, "the guilty parties should face the full wrath of the law". "It is unfathomable that a legacy built on principled action, integrity and a high degree of ethical standards should be so sullied and allegedly be associated with such criminal intent." Public Protector Busisiwe Mkhwebane earlier this month released a damning report revealing how R300m meant for the poor and indigent in the Eastern Cape, was misused for former president Nelson Mandela's funeral in 2013. Collusion between officials, service providers She pointed to poor planning in national, provincial and local government as the key factor in the wasteful expenditure during the icon's funeral. She said there was "no properly coordinated plan for all role players in the funeral and related activities from the level of national, provincial and public entities, despite the fact that there were earlier discussions and a plan at national level for the funeral of Mandela". She said prices were unnecessarily inflated in the procurement of goods, and invoices were paid without proof that goods were delivered. Mkhwebane said she uncovered collusion between officials and service providers at the expense of the state. She recommended that Finance Minister Malusi Gigaba, as head of National Treasury, establish a task team of role players at all levels of government, to develop a coordinated plan for the eventuality of state funerals provided for in the ministerial handbook. In her remedial action, she has also advised that President Jacob Zuma enact the Special Investigating Unit to investigate additional unlawful expenditure. Mandela said he trusted that the matter would be dealt with and that anyone found to have acted unlawfully would be charged. News24