Public called to comment on draft Water Amendment By-law  12 December 2017 The City of Cape Town urges members of the public to comment on the draft Water Amendment By-law which, it is hoped, will further enhance Cape Town’s ability to become a more water-sensitive and resilient city in the future. Read more below: The existing Water By-law, as amended in 2015, was a progressive piece of legislation and, among other things, looked at the change in Cape Town’s demographics and associated water demand scenarios and water-wise strategy. In 2015 the by-law was amended to ensure that the City could adequately monitor and control water-related services and also to oversee the plumbing industry. However, due to the impact of the worst drought in recorded history, the by-law requires further amendments.   Key proposals now include: - reducing the demand on the municipal water supply by expanding the regulations on alternative water use and efficient plumbing fittings - enhancing enforcement of the by-law in relation to plumbers within the metro - strengthening the requirements for sub-metering on properties that have multiple accommodation units ‘The amendments attempt to address the City’s emphasis on proactive governance to better adapt to the New Normal, which recognises our position in a water-scarce region,’ said the City’s Mayoral Committee Member for Informal Settlements, Water and Waste Services; and Energy, Councillor Xanthea Limberg. This is in alignment with the City’s commitment to prioritising resource efficiency and security which forms part of the Organisational Development and Transformation Plan. ‘At its core, the amendments seek to move Cape Town towards becoming a more resilient, water-sensitive city. This is another action to ensure that we are able not only to survive droughts of the magnitude that we are currently experiencing, but that we can thrive despite intense droughts. ‘It also sets out the roles and responsibilities of water users to ensure that we all take responsibility for conservation-based water management practices,’ said Councillor Limberg. Members of the public may view the proposed by-law at subcouncil offices and at http://www.capetown.gov.za/City-Connect/Have-your-say/Issues-open-for-public-comment/comment-on-the-proposed-draft-water-amendment-by-law Comments may be sent to WaterPollution.Control@capetown.gov.za until 8 January 2018. Please see www.capetow.gov.za/thinkwater for more water-related information. Issued by Xanthea Limberg, Mayoral Committee Member for Informal Settlements, Water and Waste Services, 12 December 2017  