SACP Statement on USA President recognising Jerusalem as the capital of apartheid Israel THE SACP VEHEMENTLY CONDEMNS THE US PRESIDENT DECISION ATTEMPTING A UNILATERAL CHANGE ON THE STATUS OF JERUSALEM The SACP condemns the decision by the President of the United States of America Donald Trump, recognising Jerusalem as the capital of apartheid Israel. President Trump also ordered the US embassy to be moved to Jerusalem. This irresponsible decision goes against international law and UN Security Council resolutions. The holy city of Jerusalem is under the protection of the United Nations and therefore no single country can unilaterally impose on the Palestinians, a new status for Jerusalem. The decision is a sign of Trump’s crypto-Zionism and his impervious attitude against resolutions of the UN. His decision is a continuation of American policy on the Palestinian issue, on a worse trajectory than his predecessors. It signals that Trump suffers serious dementia on the Palestinian reality and that decisions of such a nature will inevitably reignite with impunity, the atrociously criminal killings of Palestinian women and children by Israel. Trump decision also unmasks the fallacy and shows that in earnest this is not about Judaism as a religion and that not only is Zionism not equal to Judaism but that the two are poles apart. Zionism is apartheid and is a certain pseudo-religious variant of colonialism and imperialism of the big bourgeoisie. The decision only serves to appease Israel, a junior partner of Western imperialism, but is in reality a continuation of the ‘New Middle East’ project, the imperialist grand plan to pursue total control of the riches of Middle Eastern resources. The SACP denounces this decision, which equals provocation and aggression and will only create inflame further tensions leading to loss of lives. The USA, EU and Israel, must shoulder the burden of responsibility for the disaster that this decision will manifest. We reiterate our position of a two-state solution, with an independent sovereign Palestine on the contiguous borders of 1969, with East Jerusalem as its capital. We call on the South African government to cut diplomatic ties with Israel and upon millions of peace and justice loving South Africans, both Jewish and non-Jews to massively protest against this decision. Statement issued by the SACP, 11 December 2017