EFF STATEMENT ON SACP ANC CON PLAN IN METSIMAHOLO Friday, December 22, 2017 The EFF notes the SACP's cooperation with the ANC in Metsimaholo as a fraudulent and disingenuous electoral practice meant to con the people of Metsimaholo. After going on the electoral platform alone, the SACP argued that it is an alternative to the ANC, only to vote the ANC back into power through a back door. This means it was never a genuine alternative to the ANC, rather a decoy meant to mislead the voters. The people of Metsimaholo must not that the ANC-SACP alliance has actually been the one running Metsimaholo since 1994. This means the SACP has actually been complicit all these years in ANC corruption and poor service delivery Metsimaholo. Therefore, SACP going on an electoral platform promising to remove the corrupt ANC government is now confirmed as a disingenuous act that only brought back the same ANC that ignored Metsimaholo in power.  The initially EFF held deliberations about forming an alternative government in good faith trusting that SACP was genuine as the Metsimaholo people did. However, the SACP only demanded positions and never spoke about policy because that is what they care about. They even asked the EFF to request the DA to vote for them, so they can become government. The EFF, however, refused because in principle, SACP must directly speak to DA if they want their votes and not get them through an unprincipled back door.  The people of Metsimaholo and the whole of SA should know that the SACP is not an alternative, but a faction in the ANC fighting for state positions. This cuts across all levels of the SACP, who take platforms to demand positions for their leaders without elaborate socialist alternatives. In all instances where they held government positions, particularly at a national level, they continue with ANC poor service delivery, corruption and neoliberal policies.  The EFF will continue as opposition and will add value to council from that point of view. It is also noteworthy that Lindiwe Shongwe only received 10 votes in her own Ward during the elections. This is the calibre of candidate SACP has; they do not enjoy any popular support by the people because they are not community activists, just red-position mongers in a general party of lumpen intellectuals.  Statement issued by the Economic Freedom Fighters, 22 December 2017