ANC STATEMENT ON THE LAUNCH OF THE AFRICAN DEMOCRATIC CHANGE PARTY The African National Congress (ANC) has noted the launch of the African Democratic Change (ADEC) party by former ANC MP Makhosi Khoza. South Africa is a multiparty democracy and as such, a plethora of divergent views within our body politic is to be welcomed. The ANC nevertheless notes with regret that the launch of the ADEC should be marred by the decision of the new party’s leadership to blatantly appropriate the colours of the ANC into its logo. The black, green and gold colors are recognized both locally and internationally and are associated with the long and proud history of Africa’s oldest liberation movement.  Further deliberate action is taken to ensure the imagery within the logo closely resembles that of the ANC. That the ADEC should incorporate the exact colors, as well as the exact sequence in which they are presented, into its logo points to a paucity of ideas at best, and political chicanery at worst.  It appears to be an attempt to attract supporters by means of subterfuge, which is regrettable. Undoubtedly the ADEC has taken this decision with the possibility of contesting the national elections in 2019 and thus intending to confuse voters who rightly associate the colors with that of the ANC. This undermines the spirit of free and fair elections. Accordingly, the ANC has briefed it’s legal team to lodge an objection with the Independent Electoral Commission against this blatant mischief.  The ANC is not surprised that yet another political party in South Africa is attempting to ride on the coattails of ANC icons, iconography and symbolism. We saw this same chance taking with the launch of the ill-fated Congress of the People (COPE) which sought to associate its own history with the Congress of the People in Kliptown; the African Independent Congress (AIC) and the DA’s use of Nelson Mandela in its municipal government election campaign in 2016. With no history and traditions of their own of the stature of the ANC - they have resorted to appropriation and intellectual property theft. Whilst we understand the ANC will forever set the standard for all political formations in South Africa, we do nonetheless encourages all current and prospective political parties to broaden their intellectual and creative horizons with regards to their positioning in the hearts and minds of our people.  Statement issued by Zizi Kodwa, ANC national spokesperson, 4 December 2017