PRESIDENT ZUMA APPOINTS THE PRESIDENT OF THE SUPREME COURT OF APPEAL 26 May 2017 President Jacob Zuma has in terms of section 174 (3) of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996, and after consultation with the Judicial Service Commission, appointed Honourable Justice Mandisa Muriel Lindelwa Maya as the President of the Supreme Court of Appeal with immediate effect in an existing vacancy. Justice Maya is the first woman to be appointed to the highest office at the Supreme Court of Appeal since the establishment of the Court in 1910. &ldquo;Her appointment to the position elevates her to the third highest position in the Judicial Branch, after the Chief Justice and Deputy Chief Justice of the Republic. We wish to congratulate her for being the first woman to occupy such a high position in the Judiciary and wish Justice Maya all the best in her new important responsibility of advancing our constitutional democracy,&rdquo; said President Zuma. *** PRESIDENT ZUMA APPOINTS JUDGES TO DIFFERENT COURTS President Jacob Zuma has, in terms of section 174 (6) of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996, and on the advice of the Judicial Service Commission, appointed judges to serve in different courts.. President Zuma has appointed the following judges: (i) The Honourable Mr Justice Malesela Francis Legodi as Judge President of the Mpumalanga Division of High Court, with effect from&nbsp;01 August 2017 &nbsp; in an existing vacancy. (ii) The Honourable Mr Justice Lazarus Pule Tlaletsi as Judge President of the Northern Cape Division of High Court with effect from&nbsp;18 September 2017 &nbsp; in an existing vacancy; and (iii) Ms Tebogo Jennifer Djaje as a Judge of the North West Division of the High Court with effect from01 June 2017 &nbsp; in an existing vacancy. &nbsp;President Zuma has also, in terms of section 153 (4) of the Labour Relations Act, 1995, appointed: (i) Ms Daphney Mahosi as a Judge of the Labour Court with effect from&nbsp;01 July 2017 &nbsp; in an existing vacancy. (ii) Mr Graham Nasious Moshoana as a Judge of the Labour Court with effect from&nbsp;31 July 2017 &nbsp; in an existing vacancy (iii) Ms Portia Nkutha-Nkontwana as a Judge of the Labour Court with effect from&nbsp;31 July 2017 &nbsp; in an existing vacancy. &ldquo;We wish the appointed judges all the best in their new responsibilities and we are confident that they will play an essential role in further enhancing our criminal justice system and constitutional democracy&rdquo; President Zuma said. Statements issued by&nbsp;Dr Bongani Ngqulunga, The Presidency, 26 May 2017